first draft of strategy updates (#3135)
sourcegraph/handbook: content/strategy-goals/strategy/code-graph/search/product.md

- [Search Product backlog](https://github.com/sourcegraph/sourcegraph/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Ateam%2Fsearch-product/)
- [Roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/sourcegraph/projects/214/views/34?filterQuery=owning-org%3A%22Code+Graph%22+type%3ARoadmap+owning-team%3A%22Search+product%22)

> ## Goals

Reviewer: This goals section feels like it might be better in the "what's next and why" section for a couple reasons:

- The page flow won't bounce between future to past to future
- Some of the needed context will be closer (i.e., how are you going to achieve these goals is in the whats next and why section.)

My suggestion would be to start the what's next and why section with what your goals are, and then go from there.

Reviewer: A second thought, the goals listed here are more like principles or guidelines than goals. Continuing to differentiate, providing compelling solutions for important needs, and maintaing room for experimentation aren't particularly measurable or have a point where you could say they are done. They are more like open-ended aspirations.

Reviewer 2: Maybe with this edit we could keep the page flow as-is?

```suggestion
## Guiding principles
```

- Continue to differentiate the core platform beyond code search. Search will always power our platform, but to remain competitive we need to become more than the world's best code search

- Provide compelling solutions for the most pressing use cases of our customers

- Maintain room for experimentation and exploratory work that creates meaningful business value

## Where we are now

> Sourcegraph is the leading code intelligence platform in the market, used by tens of thousands of developers across enterprises of all sizes. The engine powering the platform is Code Search, which has advanced, novel search capabilities, such as [structural search](https://learn.sourcegraph.com/how-to-use-structural-search-in-sourcegraph) and [diff/commit search](https://sourcegraph.com/notebooks/Tm90ZWJvb2s6MTI=).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sourcegraph is the leading code intelligence platform in the market, used by tens of thousands of developers across enterprises of all sizes. The engine powering the platform is Code Search, which has advanced, novel search capabilities such as [structural search](https://learn.sourcegraph.com/how-to-use-structural-search-in-sourcegraph) and [diff/commit search](https://sourcegraph.com/notebooks/Tm90ZWJvb2s6MTI=).
```

> The Search Product team has the dual mission of increasing the value of the core platform by developing best-in-class capabilities for use by all product teams, and building differentiated products and features of its own.

Reviewer: Does this describe something that the search product team is doing in particular? As I read it, any software team making anything would have the same mission (make our product better by making good features that people use).

Reviewer 2: I believe the intent was something like this:

```suggestion
The Search Product team has a dual mission:
- Increasing the value of the search as a platform for other teams to build upon (Code Insights, Batch Changes), with these other team's goals in mind.
- Building differentiated user-facing products and features of its own.
```

@jyavorska does this seem more valuable?

> In addition to the core search experience, Search Product team's scope includes [Code monitors](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/code_monitoring) and [Notebooks](https://sourcegraph.com/notebooks?tab=explore). Today, all products and features in Search Product's scope are included in every Sourcegraph contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the core search experience, the Search Product team's scope includes [Code monitors](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/code_monitoring) and [Notebooks](https://sourcegraph.com/notebooks?tab=explore). Today, all products and features in Search Product's scope are included in every Sourcegraph contract.
```

> ## What's next and why

Reviewer 2: I don't have a good edit for this yet, but I expect the process of iterating with customers on Notebooks and Compute to be very active, and as such it should be represented here. Beyond the foundational investments we want to make, we should probably explicitly state that a goal of the quarter is also to understand what the next round of product development on Compute and Notebooks should look like.

Author: Made a change to address this elsewhere.

> Over the next quarter, Search Product will focus on foundational work in critical product areas and conduct research to inform an improved search experience.

Reviewer: With a change like this, you don't need a separate section below describing what the foundational work is.

```suggestion
Over the next quarter, Search Product will focus on foundational work (generalizing the search backend to make it more powerful for internal consumers, and taking a fresh look at the core search UX) and conducting research to inform an improved search experience.
```

### Foundational work

Our planned foundational work falls broadly into two buckets: generalizing the search backend to make it more usable and powerful for internal consumers, and taking a fresh look at the core search UX.

#### Search backend

> Over the past year, we’ve spent a significant amount of time cleaning up and improving the search backend. These efforts include, but are not limited to:

Reviewer: These first couple paragraphs seem to be focused on where we are now, and might work better in that section. Up to you.

- Implementing streaming across backends to minimize latency and memory usage
- Partitioning search code into different domains and stages to manage complexity
- Simplifying and unifying search result types

The primary goal of these efforts has been to push the backend to a state where it will be maintainable in the face of new features. This is an ongoing process, but we’ve gained significant ground.

> Q2's work will start to shift the focus of backend work from maintainability to capability and flexibility. This means thinking of “search” more as an API that we provide for internal consumers that exposes all the information needed to build features on top of it. Though search is an API, it's not yet flexible enough to solve all the use cases presented by, for example, Code Insights, and some other proposed user-facing query features. This work is important because it enables development of high-value roadmap items, and the ability to conceive of novel features that weren't possible before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Q2, we will start to shift the focus of backend work from maintainability to capability and flexibility. This means thinking of “search” more as an API that we provide for internal consumers that exposes all the information needed to build features on top of it. Though search is an API, it's not yet flexible enough to solve all the use cases presented by, for example, Code Insights, and some other proposed user-facing query features. This work is important because it enables development of high-value roadmap items, and the ability to conceive of novel features that weren't possible before.
```

#### Search UX

> In light of new search capabilities, we believe there's a big opportunity to create an outstanding search experience, which is vital to Sourcegraph's continued dominance in the code search market.

Reviewer: What new search capabilities? We should say because the reader may not know.

Reviewer 2: What do we think of an edit like this?

```suggestion
Our search language, capabilities and interface have evolved a lot over the past year, as we introduced search predicates, Compute, the search reference, among others. Following these evolutions, we want to take a holistic look at our core search experience. Ensuring our core search experience is high-quality, cohesive and intuitive is vital to Sourcegraph's continued dominance in the code search market.
```

> This foundational work will have design and technical components. Design will focus on digesting user feedback, conducting user research, and iterating on UI and UX solutions. Engineering will focus on enabling and collaborating with design to determine the execution path, specify a development roadmap, and start development.

Reviewer: Isn't this also how any development team works? Or is there some unique aspect to what search core is doing here?

Reviewer 2: I agree with Jason, I think we can do away with this paragraph (the effort is well-described in the research section).

```suggestion
```

### Research

Our research efforts will consist of establishing a baseline for UX issues by conducting a UX audit and building an estimated and prioritized design debt and UX roadmap. We will also conduct user research on Notebooks usage to inform its future roadmap.

Despite being research, there will be some delivery related to this work. We plan to release an incremental improvement to the logged-in homepage, refactor the search results UI components, and execute on technical work related to our migration off of the Monaco editor.

> We're also making a bet on natural language search, exploring how we might incorporate ML models to generate query suggestions from user input. This is an interesting approach because, rather than training a model to semantically classify code, we'll be training it to generate a valid Sourcegraph query from natural language input.

Reviewer: Making a bet to me sounds more like we've already decided to invest in it. I realize it's in the research section, but I'd change this to something more like we're going to start exploring, rather than that we are placing a bet on it.

Probably also no need to describe how it is going to/might work below, since we don't really know yet. I think people will already understand what natural language search means.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll also start to explore usage of ML models to enable natural language search, whether through generating query suggestions from natural language, or directly building a natural language search backend. We'll evaluate both approaches, and spike out the work required to get them in front of users. We expect this to be a long-term effort, and as such we are not targeting actual integration into the Sourcegraph product this quarter.
```

Reworded based on @jyavorska's comment, also clarifying that there are two paths we can potentially take (and we'll likely evaluate both), and what we expect to achieve (and not achieve) this quarter.

I agree we can remove the specifics of how this might work below.

For example, if a user enters:

> Python function for k-means clustering

We'd want to see the model generate a query like:

`file:.\py$ kmeans select:symbol.function`

Learning Sourcegraph's query language is a struggle for many users, to the point that they simply never go beyond using literal search. Anything we can do to reduce the learning curve and improve result quality will have a big impact on user experience and potentially drive more usage.

If successful, this effort would have implications beyond Code Search. Imagine being able to create a Code Insight or a Batch Change with natural language.

#### What we're not working on and why

> This quarter, we are largely deferring feature work in favor of foundational and research efforts. Q1 was a hugely productive quarter for the team, and we want to let the new products and features that shipped get some usage and garner feedback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This quarter, we are largely deferring launching new features in favor of foundational and research efforts. Q1 was a hugely productive quarter for the team, and we want to let the new products and features that shipped get some usage and garner feedback.
```

I think this might convey what you mean better?

Reviewer 2: A further edit on @jyavorska's to make it even clearer (we _will_ ship work this quarter, but it will benefit internal consumers first).

```suggestion
This quarter, we are largely deferring launching new user-facing features in favor of foundational and research efforts. Q1 was a hugely productive quarter for the team, and we want to let the new products and features that shipped get some usage and garner feedback.
```
